[console_scripts]
archive_collectdes = tokio.cli.archive_collectdes:main
archive_esnet_snmp = tokio.cli.archive_esnet_snmp:main
archive_lmtdb = tokio.cli.archive_lmtdb:main
archive_mmperfmon = tokio.cli.archive_mmperfmon:main
cache_collectdes = tokio.cli.cache_collectdes:main
cache_darshan = tokio.cli.cache_darshan:main
cache_esnet_snmp = tokio.cli.cache_esnet_snmp:main
cache_isdct = tokio.cli.cache_isdct:main
cache_lfsstatus = tokio.cli.cache_lfsstatus:main
cache_lmtdb = tokio.cli.cache_lmtdb:main
cache_mmperfmon = tokio.cli.cache_mmperfmon:main
cache_nersc_globuslogs = tokio.cli.cache_nersc_globuslogs:main
cache_nersc_jobsdb = tokio.cli.cache_nersc_jobsdb:main
cache_slurm = tokio.cli.cache_slurm:main
cache_topology = tokio.cli.cache_topology:main
compare_isdct = tokio.cli.compare_isdct:main
darshan_bad_ost = tokio.cli.darshan_bad_ost:main
darshan_scoreboard = tokio.cli.darshan_scoreboard:main
find_darshanlogs = tokio.cli.find_darshanlogs:main
index_darshanlogs = tokio.cli.index_darshanlogs:main
summarize_h5lmt = tokio.cli.summarize_h5lmt:main
summarize_job = tokio.cli.summarize_job:main
summarize_tts = tokio.cli.summarize_tts:main

