EPRsimGUI
=========
Open-source GUI application for simulating cw-EPR spectra. 
EPRsimGUI has been developed in the group of Prof. Dr. Stefan Weber at the University of Freiburg,
Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany, during the last couple of years. EPRsimGUI was mainly developed by Stephan Rein. The program uses several concepts described in [1].
EPRsim is open-source and available free of charge.

Find the full documentation at the link below:
https://www.radicals.uni-freiburg.de/de/software


Installation
------------

Install EPRsim via pip:

$ pip install eprsimgui


Run EPRsimGUI
-------------

Call it after installing EPRsimGUI in a virtual Python environment by:

$ EPRsimGUI



Notes
------

GUI for the simulation of cw-EPR in different motional regimes
(isotropic, fast-motion and solid state)
All spectra are simulated as field sweep spectra.
The GUI program uses the Python package EPRsim.

Isotropic/fast-motion
For the fast-motion regime/isotropic limit, the program solves
the implicit Breit-Rabi formula [1] in a fixed-point iteration.
Anisotropic line-broadening effects in the fast-motion regime
are calculated via the Kivelson formula [2].
Currently, Euler angles between tensors are ignored by the algorithm!
All tensors (only relevant for fast-motion) need to be in their principal
axis system and colinear to each other.

Solid-state
In the solid-state regime, the program uses a full matrix diagonalization
algorithm. Therefore, only spin systems with a Hilbert space
dimension of dim(H) < 512 can be calculated.
The powder average is partially generated by interpolation
of eigenvalues and transition probabilitites (similar to [1]).
The interpolation level is automatically set by the program.
The solid state algorithm treats arbitrary spin systems as long
as the Hilbert space dimension is within the threshold.
Spin-polarization can be defined (withing the electronic sublevels)
as zero-field populations. The program constructs (sparse) density matrices
out of the zero-field eigenvectors, to efficiently calculate the population
transformation from zero field to high field.
Per default, the program calculates
with thermal equilibrium. Nuclear quadrupolar couplings (for I > 0.5)
are currently not implemented.



Properties
----------

EPRsimGUI provides:

- Intuitive GUI for EPR simulations
- Simulation for cw-EPR spectra in the solid-state limit and fast-motion regime
- Flexible simulation options
- Intuitive PSE for choosing nuclear spins
- Basic data processing functions for experimental data
- Optimized performance of the simulation algorithm (uses EPRsim)
- Open-source


Feedback
--------

We are eager to hear about your experiences with GloPel. You can
email me at stephan.rein@physchem.uni-freiburg.de.  


References
----------

[1] : S. Stoll, A. Schweiger, J. Magn. Reson., 2006, 178, 42-55

[2] : N. M. Atherton, Principles of Electron Spin Resonance, 1993


Acknowledgement
---------------

A number of people have helped shaping EPRsim and the ideas behind.
First and foremost, Prof. Dr. Stefan Weber and Dr. Sylwia Kacprzak (now Bruker Biospin)
were for years the driving force behind EPRsimGUI.
